Taylor (#2290)
openturns/openturns: python/doc/theory/reliability_sensitivity/taylor_moments.rst

In the remainder, we denote by :math:`\Cov \uX`  the covariance matrix of :math:`\uX`, defined by:

.. math::

    \Cov \uX= \left(\Expect{\left(X_i - \Expect{X_i} \right)\times\left(X_j - \Expect{X_j}\right)_{ij} \right)}

| **Case 1:** :math:`Y \in \Rset`:

The second order Taylor expansion of :math:`h` around :math:`\ux = \mu` is written as:

.. math::

    Y = h(\mu) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h}{\partial x^i }\right)(\mu)(X_i-\mu_i) + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x^i \partial x^j}\right)(\mu)(X_i-\mu_i)+(X_j-\mu_j) o(\Cov \uX)

| If we use the first order expansion, we get:

  .. math::

       \begin{array}{lcl}
            \Expect{Y} & = & h(\muX)\\
            \Var{Y} & = & \sum_{i=1}^{d} \left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial X_i}\right)^2(\muX). \Var  X_i
        \end{array}

| If we use the second order expansion, we get:

  .. math::

           \Expect{Y}  = h (\muX) + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} \left(\frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x^i \partial x^j}\right)(\muX,\muX) . (\Cov \uX)_{ij}

> | The second order approximation of the variance  is not implemented because it requires both the knowledge of higher order derivatives of :math:`h`

Reviewer: drop the "|" here

Author: Yes...

of the mean and variance of :math:`Y`.

We use the notations introduced in :ref:`Taylor Expansion <taylor_expansion>`.

In the remainder, let :math:`\Cov \uX` be the covariance matrix of :math:`\uX`, defined by:

.. math::

    \Cov \uX = \mat{C}

where :math:`\mat{C} \in \Rset^{n_X \times n_X}` is the input covariance matrix:

.. math::

    c_{ij} = \Expect{\left(X_i - \Expect{X_i}\right)\left(X_j - \Expect{X_j} \right)}

with :math:`c_{ii} = \sigma_i^2`.

Case 1: :math:`q=1`, :math:`Y = h(\vect{X}) \in \Rset`
------------------------------------------------------

The second-order Taylor expansion of :math:`h` at the point :math:`\ux = \vect{\mu}` is:

.. math::

    y = h(\vect{\mu}) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i }\right)(\vect{\mu})(x_i-\mu_i)
    + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j = 1}^d \left(\frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x_i \partial x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})
    (x_i-\mu_i)(x_j-\mu_j) + o\left(\|\vect{x}\|^2\right).

The expectation and variance of the first-order expansion are:

  .. math::

            \Expect{Y} & \approx & h(\vect{\mu})\\
            \Var{Y} & \approx & \sum_{i=1}^{d} \sigma_i^2 \left(\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i}

>             \right)(\vect{\mu}) \right)^2

Reviewer: drop the "&" here unless you want a tabular env

  .. math::

       \Expect{Y}  \approx h (\vect{\mu}) + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} c_{ij}\left(\frac{\partial^2 h}
       {\partial x_i \partial x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu}).

The second-order approximation of the variance  is not implemented because it requires both the knowledge of higher
order derivatives of :math:`h` and the knowledge of moments of order strictly greater
than 2 of the distribution of :math:`\uX`.

Case 2: :math:`q>1`, :math:`Y =(Y_1, \dots, Y_q) \in \Rset^q`
-------------------------------------------------------------

The second-order Taylor expansion of :math:`h = (h_1, \dots, h_q)` at the point
:math:`\ux = \vect{\mu}` for each marginal function :math:`h_k` is:

.. math::

      y_k = h_k(\vect{\mu}) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h_k}{\partial x_i }\right)(\vect{\mu})
      (x_i-\mu_i)+ \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial^2 h_k}{\partial x_i \partial
      x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})(x_i-\mu_i)(x_j-\mu_j) + o(\|\vect{x}\|^2).

where :math:`1\leq k \leq q`.

The expectation and covariance matrix of the first-order expansion are:

  .. math::

         \Expect{\uY} & \approx &  h(\vect{\mu})\\

>          \Cov \uY & \approx & \left( \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} c_{ij}  \left( \frac{\partial h_k}{\partial x_i }

Reviewer: maybe here too

.. _taylor_expansion_moments:

Taylor expansion moments
------------------------

> One way to evaluate the central dispersion (expectation and variance) of the variable :math:`\uY=h(\uX)`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this page, we consider the Taylor expansion of a function.
We use the notations introduced in :ref:`_taylor_expansion`.
One way to evaluate the central dispersion (expectation and variance) of the variable :math:`\uY=h(\uX)`
```

Author: yes

is to use the Taylor expansion of the function :math:`h: \Rset^d \rightarrow \Rset^q` at
the mean point :math:`\vect{\mu} = \Expect{\uX}`.

> 

Reviewer 2: This will remove the unnecessary newline:
![image](https://github.com/openturns/openturns/assets/31351465/8e133c45-f732-4045-a412-22738b5337bd)

```suggestion
```

Author: ok

Depending on the order of the Taylor expansion (classically first or second order), we get different approximations
of the mean and variance of :math:`Y`.

In the remainder, we denote by :math:`\Cov \uX`  the covariance matrix of :math:`\uX`, defined by:

.. math::

>     \Cov \uX = (c_{ij})_{ij}

Reviewer 2: This equation has no meaning from my point of view.
```suggestion
    \Cov \uX = \mat{C}
```

Author: ok

> where:

Reviewer 2: For what values of $i$ and $j$?

> where:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where :math`\mat{C} \in \Rset^{n_X \times n_X}` is the input covariance matrix:
```

Author: ok

.. math::

    c_{ij} = \Expect{\left(X_i - \Expect{X_i}\right)\left(X_j - \Expect{X_j} \right)}

with :math:`c_{ii} = \sigma_i^2`.

> **Case 1:** :math:`Y \in \Rset` , :math:`q=1`:

Reviewer 2: Instead of using a bold face text, please create a new subsection.

Author: ok

Reviewer 2: The new section was not correctly created: this created a main section in the "Reliability, sensitivity" section. I fixed that at #2450

> The second order Taylor expansion of :math:`h` around :math:`\ux = \vect{\mu}` is written as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second order Taylor expansion of :math:`h` at the point :math:`\ux = \vect{\mu}` is written as:
```

Author: ok

.. math::

>     Y = h(\vect{\mu}) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i }\right)(\vect{\mu})(X_i-\mu_i)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    h(\vect{X}) = h(\vect{\mu}) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i }\right)(\vect{\mu})(X_i-\mu_i)
```

Author: Yes you are right. I changed Y into y and X into x.

Reviewer 2: As far as I can read, you replaced Y with the lower case letter y. This is not correct: the left hand side is really h(x) in the Taylor expansion. I fixed that in #2450.

    + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j = 1}^d \left(\frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x_i \partial x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})

>     (X_i-\mu_i)(X_j-\mu_j) + o(||\uX||^2)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    (X_i-\mu_i)(X_j-\mu_j) + o(||\uX||^2).
```

> If we use the first order expansion, we get:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The expectation and variance of the first order expansion are:
```

Author: ok

  .. math::

>        \begin{array}{lcl}

Reviewer 2: Please remove the unnecessary array here.

>        \begin{array}{lcl}
>             \Expect{Y} & \simeq & h(\vect{\mu})\\
>             \Var{Y} & \simeq & \sum_{i=1}^{d} \sigma_i^2 \left[\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i}
>             \right)(\vect{\mu}) \right]^2
>        \end{array}

Reviewer 2: You wrongly use the `\simeq` symbol which means asymptotically equal (see e.g; this message on [Stack](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/864606/difference-between-%E2%89%88-%E2%89%83-and-%E2%89%85)) instead of the `\approx` symbol.
```suggestion
            \Expect{Y} & \simeq & h(\vect{\mu})\\
            \Var{Y} & \simeq & \sum_{i=1}^{d} \sigma_i^2 \left[\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial x_i}
            \right)(\vect{\mu}) \right]^2
```

Author: ok

> If we use the second order expansion, we get:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The expectation of the second order expansion is:
```

Author: ok

  .. math::

>        \Expect{Y}  \simeq h (\vect{\mu}) + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} c_{ij}\left(\frac{\partial^2 h}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       \Expect{Y}  \approx h (\vect{\mu}) + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} c_{ij}\left(\frac{\partial^2 h}
```

Author: ok

>        {\partial x_i \partial x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       {\partial x_i \partial x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu}).
```

Author: ok

Reviewer 2: The equation of the first order variance in the case where the output is scalar is not correct.

The current equation is:

![image](https://github.com/openturns/openturns/assets/31351465/499ff380-3c56-4df8-9f7a-5f2b63c9692d)

This is valid only in the special case where the input are independent.

The (almost) correct equation is:

![image](https://github.com/openturns/openturns/assets/31351465/cb90fca0-e417-4cf2-b34a-6261f99c21ab)

But the previous equation involves derivatives with respect to random variables (as implied by the use of upcase letters), which has to be fixed.

The second order approximation of the variance  is not implemented because it requires both the knowledge of higher
order derivatives of :math:`h` and the knowledge of moments of order strictly greater
than 2 of the distribution of :math:`\uX`.

> **Case 2:** :math:`Y =(Y_1, \dots, Y_q) \in \Rset^q` with :math:`q>1`:

Reviewer 2: Instead of using a bold face text, please create a new subsection.

Author: ok

The second order Taylor expansion of :math:`h = (h_1, \dots, h_q)` around :math:`\ux = \vect{\mu}` is written
for each marginal function :math:`h_k` as:

.. math::

      Y_k = h_k(\vect{\mu}) + \sum_{i = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial h_k}{\partial x_i }\right)(\vect{\mu})
      (X_i-\mu_i)+ \frac{1}{2} \sum_{i,j = 1}^d \left( \frac{\partial^2 h_k}{\partial x_i \partial

>       x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})(X_i-\mu_i)(X_j-\mu_j) + o(||\uX||^2)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      x_j}\right)(\vect{\mu})(X_i-\mu_i)(X_j-\mu_j) + o(||\uX||^2).
```

Author: ok

where :math:`1\leq k \leq q`.

> If we use the first order expansion, we get:

Reviewer 2: Idem.

Author: yes

  .. math::

>        \begin{array}{lcl}

Reviewer 2: Please remove the unnecessary array here.

Author: ok. I did it on the entire file

         \Expect{\uY} & \simeq &  h(\vect{\mu})\\
         \Cov \uY & \simeq & \left( \sum_{i,j=1}^{d} c_{ij}  \left( \frac{\partial h_k}{\partial x_i }
         \right)(\vect{\mu})\left( \frac{\partial h_l}{\partial x_j }\right)(\vect{\mu})\right)_{k,l}
       \end{array}

> If we use the second order expansion, we get:

Reviewer 2: Idem.
